## Background and Project Aim
The bat and ball game of cricket is widely considered to have originated in England in the 16th century and as a result of the British empire has since become one of the most played and watched sports in the world. According to the International Cricket Council (2018), there are over 1 billion cricket supporters worldwide and nearly 90% of them come from the Indian subcontinent. It is the most popular sport in Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan and India and support for the game is particularly fervent in the latter.

Twenty20 (T20) cricket is a form of the game that was first played professionally in 2003, when the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) introduced the Twenty20 Cup to the domestic schedule, to be played by the 18 First Class counties. T20 is a shortened form of the game where two teams of 11 players play one innings each. One teams bowls 20 overs, each consisting of 6 deliveries, at the other team and the aim is to score more runs than the other team. Two members of the batting team are batting at any one time and runs are scored by both running from one end of the wicket, a 22 yard by 10 foot strip of grass in the middle of the pitch, to the other, or when the ball crosses the boundary of the pitch either after hitting the ground (4 runs) or without hitting the ground after making contact with the bat (6 runs). The bowling team attempt to prevent the batting team from scoring runs and also attempt to get the batters out (take wickets), principally by bowling the ball at the stumps, two sets of three wooden poles at each end of the wicket, catching the ball off the bat before it bounces or hitting the stumps with the ball while the batters are in the process of completing a run. Since two batters have to be in at a time, when a team loses its 10th wicket the innings is completed.

In 2007 India beat their biggest rivals, Pakistan, in the final of the inaugural Twenty20 World Cup. Prior to this, Indian supporters had been sceptical of the newest format of the game, but the international team’s success led to a burgeoning interest and the advent of the Indian Premier League (IPL), which was announced by the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) in September 2007 and would start in 2008. The inaugural edition consisted of 8 teams belonging to franchises that were sold for an initial $723.59m (https://www.espncricinfo.com/story/ipl-announces-franchise-owners-333193) playing a round robin, followed by semi-finals and a final. The format has varied slightly from 2008 to the present day, but has always been contested by 8, 9 or 10 franchise teams. The sum of money paid for the franchises before the 2008 tournament is a reflection of the status of the owners of the franchises, including Bollywood stars and multinational conglomerates. The wealth of the franchise owners meant they were able to entice many of the world’s best cricketers to play in the IPL and this, along with the marketability of and excitement provided by the short format of the game has led to it being one of the most popular sporting events in the world.

Some sports, like football, are continuous in nature and can be difficult to analyse statistically. However, cricket is a sport that consists of a number of discrete events (balls, or deliveries), the outcome of which can be measured in terms of the number of runs and wickets (0 or 1) that result from it. Such ball-by-ball data is widely available on the internet and can be used to gain insights into the game (Player evaluation in Twenty20 cricket, Davis, Perera & Swartz, 2015). More complex data has also been collected in recent years, including ball tracking data that can illustrate where the ball was released from, where it hit the ground, how fast it was travelling and where it passed the batter and the stumps. This revolution in data collection has enriched the simple ball-by-ball data, but is not publicly available due to the costs associated with collecting it.

Baseball is another game that consists of a number of discrete events and, although the two are very different tactically, can be used as a blueprint for the use of data analysis in cricket. Sabermetrics is a term invented by Bill James and encompasses the statistical analysis of statistics in baseball in an attempt to empirically compare the performance of different baseball players. Sabermetrics was brought to public attention by the book Moneyball, published in 2003, which chronicles the statistical approach of the Oakland Athletics’ player recruitment and how it enabled them to reach the 2002 Major League Baseball playoffs despite having the third lowest team salary in the competition. While complex data analysis has been used successfully in baseball for nearly two decades, only recently have professional cricket teams started enlisting the help of individuals with expertise in data analysis and data science. Companies like CricViz, founded in 2014, have brought analytics to the fore in cricket, working with teams in the IPL, Australia’s Big Bash League and the Pakistan Super League to improve results on the pitch, as well as with broadcasters and media organisations including Sky Sports and The Telegraph to improve the understanding of the cricket following public.

The aims of this research are to use data mining techniques to evaluate batting tactics and strategies in the IPL. We aim to investigate how they have changed over time and how they differ between teams and players. For example, it could be that some teams look to attack throughout the 20 overs and accept the higher risk of losing wickets that goes along with that, whereas others may look to accumulate and keep wickets in hand for the final (“death”) overs, when they will look to score very quickly. According to Nathan Leamon, the England cricket team’s Lead Analyst and co-founder of CricViz, the role of analysis in cricket is to provide a clearer view for captains, coaches and players and to reveal patterns that are not otherwise apparent (Sky Sports interview). Given the number of matches each team in the IPL play, understanding the tactics and strategies of opposition teams is not straightforward without detailed analysis and as a result this could provide useful insight for the aforementioned captains, coaches and players.

## Literature Review
The relationship between cricket and academic statistics dates back over two decades, and perhaps the most famous example is the Duckworth-Lewis method (Duckworth & Lewis, 1998). Cricket is a game that is frequently interrupted by adverse weather conditions and the Duckworth-Lewis method (now Duckworth-Lewis-Stern), first used in international cricket in 1997, was designed to set revised run targets in the second innings of limited overs matches that had been interrupted, in a fairer way than this had previously been done. 
